Add a backward compatibility document (#18499)
WordPress/gutenberg: docs/designers-developers/developers/backward-compatibility/README.md

# Backward Compatibility

> Gutenberg follows the WordPress backward compatibility principles. This means backward compatibility for production public API is guaranteed. In some rare occasions breaking backward compatibility is unavoidable, in that case, the breakage should be as small as possible and be documented as clearly as possible to third-party developers using dev notes.

Reviewer: > the WordPress backward compatibility principles

Is there a broader document about that somewhere?

Author: I looked quickly but didn't find any 🤔

> Gutenberg follows the WordPress backwards compatibility principles. This means Backward compatibility for producation public API is guaranteed. In some rare occasions breaking backward compatibility is unavoidable, in that case, the breakage should be as small as possible and the breakage should be documented as clearly as possible to third-party developpers using devnotes.

Reviewer: I see `backwards compatibility` and `Backward compatibility`.

Author: What do you think I should use?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gutenberg follows the WordPress backward compatibility principles. This means backward compatibility for production public API is guaranteed. In some rare occasions breaking backward compatibility is unavoidable, in that case, the breakage should be as small as possible and be documented as clearly as possible to third-party developers using dev-notes.
```

> ## What qualifies as a production public API:

Reviewer: Do you mean "production-ready"?

Author: non just production. Some APIs are not production APIs

Reviewer: Hm, should it be named production API then?

Author: you mean remove "public"?

Reviewer: Oh, no :D I meant: if these are not just "production APIs", why call them a "production public API"?

Author: That section explains the difference between production and non production APIs and which ones qualifies as public producation APIs like stated in the sentence above.

Reviewer 2: It would be clearer to me if this was phrases as "production ready public api"

Author: why "ready", if it's there it's ready?

Reviewer 2: It's just common phrasing I've seen so it reads better _to me_.  In other words, a "public api ready for production vs a public api not ready for production" (which you clarify is distinguished by what package it is built to in this section). Just an observation, it's not a sticky point for me.

Author: But that's not the meaning here. I don't want to make any difference between API ready or not for production. I want to differentiate dev tools from production code.

Reviewer 2: 🤔 hmm... ya so I guess what you're distinguishing between here is packages built for production use vs packages built for development use and both have public apis but we only care about backwards-compatibility when it comes to packages built for production?

If so, then maybe the heading could be:

> What qualifies as a public api for production use?

Again though, this is a nit.  It's completely fine with me if you just want to resolve and use the text as is.

Author: I'm leaning towards keeping it as is because it's the same term used in the previous sentence. We can iterate of course.

Reviewer: I don't fully get the term. You're saying that "production public API" consists of "production packages" and "development packages". This is a bit confusing to me. So the "development packages" is also "production public API"?

Author: production public API is just public APIs exported from production packages

Reviewer 3: The confusion comes from the fact that we never address the question:

>"What qualifies as a production public API?".

Somewhere after defining the two types of packages we have to write:

"A production public API is a public API from a production package."

> Gutenberg code base is compased of two different types of packages: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gutenberg code base is composed of two different types of packages: 
```

>  - **production packages**: these are packages that are shipped in WordPress scripts (example: wp-components, wp-editor...).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - **production packages**: these are packages that are shipped as WordPress scripts (example: wp-components, wp-editor...).
```

>  - **development packages**: these are made of developper tools that can be used by third-party developpers to lint, test, format and build their themes and plugins (example: @wordpress/scrips, @wordpress/env...). Typically, these are consumed as npm dependencies in third-party projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - **development packages**: these are made out of developer tools that can be used by third-party developers to lint, test, format and build their themes and plugins (example: @wordpress/scrips, @wordpress/env...). Typically, these are consumed as npm dependencies in third-party projects.
```

>  Backward compatibility guarantee only applies to the production packages as updates happen through WordPress upgrades.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Backward compatibility guarantee only applies to the production packages as updates happen through WordPress upgrades.
```

>  Production packages use the `wp` global variable to provide APIs to third-party developpers. These APIs can be JavaScript functions, variables and React components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Production packages use the `wp` global variable to provide APIs to third-party developers. These APIs can be JavaScript functions, variables and React components.
```

> ### How to guarantee backward compatibility for a JavaScript function

Reviewer 2: Suggestion "How to preserve backward compatibility for a JavaScript function"

* The name of the function should not change.
* The order of the arguments of the function should not change.
* The function's returned value type should not change.
* Changes to arguments (new arguments, modification of semantics) is possible if we guarantee that all previous calls are still possible.

> ### How to guarantee backward compatibility for a React Component

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: "How to preserve backward compatibility..." (and the same elsewhere to remove the "guarantee" language).

* The name of the component should not change.
* The props of the components should not be removed.

> * Existing prop values should continue to be supported. If a component accept a function as prop, we can update the component to accept a new type for the same prop, but it shouldn't break existing usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Existing prop values should continue to be supported. If a component accepts a function as prop, we can update the component to accept a new type for the same prop, but it shouldn't break existing usage.
```

* Adding new props is allowed.
* React Context dependencies can only be added or removed if we ensure the previous context contract is not breaking.

> * Class names and DOM nodes used inside the tree of the component are not considered part of the public API and can be modified. That said, changes to these should be done with caution as it can affect the styling. Keep the old ones if possible. If not, document these changes and write a dev note about the changes.

Reviewer 2: I think this should be extracted to it's own section because it's worth highlighting and emphasizing. This is a common point of confusion for what's considered public.

> * Classnames, DOM nodes used inside the tree of the component are not considered part of the public API and can be modified. That said, changes to these should be done with caution as it can affect the styling. When classes need to be renamed, if possible keep the old ones. When possible, document these changes and write a devnote about the changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Class names and DOM nodes used inside the tree of the component are not considered part of the public API and can be modified. That said, changes to these should be done with caution as it can affect the styling. Keep the old ones if possible. If not, document these changes and write a dev-note about the changes.
```

### How to guarantee backward compatibility for a Block

* Existing usage of the block should not break or be marked as invalid when the editor is loaded.
* The styling of the existing blocks should be guaranteed.

> * Markup changes should be limited to the minimum but If a block need to change its saved markup making previous versions invalid, a **deprecated version** for the block should be added.

Reviewer: Maybe link to the doc about deprecating block versions?

Author: @gziolo what's the correct way to link locally? I always forget :)

## Deprecations

As the project evolves, flaws to existing APIs are discovered, or updates are required to support new features. When this happens, we try to guarantee that existing APIs don't break and build new alternative APIs.

> To encourage third-party developers to adopt the new APIs instead, we can use the **deprecated** helper to show a message explaining the deprecation and proposing the alternative whenever the old API is used.

Reviewer 2: Link to the deprecated helper here?

> To encourage third-party developpers to adopt the new APIs instead, we can use the **deprecated** helper to show a message explaining the deprecation and proposing the alternativewhenever the old API is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To encourage third-party developers to adopt the new APIs instead, we can use the **deprecated** helper to show a message explaining the deprecation and proposing the alternative whenever the old API is used.
```

Reviewer: Maybe also link to the deprecation package?

## Dev Notes

> Dev Notes are posts published in the make/core site prior to WordPress releases to inform third-party developpers about important changes to the developper APIs, these changes can include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dev notes are posts published on the make/core site prior to WordPress releases to inform third-party developers about important changes to the developer APIs, these changes can include:
```

* Promote new APIs.
* Explain how some changes to existing APIs might affect existing plugins and themes (Example: classname changes...)
* When breaking backward compatibility is unavoidable, explain the reasons and the migration flow.

> * When important deprecations are introduced (even without breakage), explain why and how third-party developpers can update their code base in consequence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When important deprecations are introduced (even without breakage), explain why and how third-party developers can update their code base in consequence.
```

Reviewer: Not sure if "in consequence" is correct.

Reviewer: Maybe "consequently"?

### Dev Note Workflow

> - When working on Pull-request and the need for a dev-note is noted/discovered, add the **Needs Dev Note** label to the PR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When working on a pull request and the need for a dev note is discovered, add the **Needs Dev Note** label to the PR.
```

> - If possible, add a comment to the PR explaining why the Dev Note is needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If possible, add a comment to the PR explaining why the dev note is needed.
```

Reviewer: Just for consistency decapitalizing... Not sure what's best. :)

> - When the first beta of the next WordPress release is shipped, go throught the list of merged PRs included in this release and tagged with the **Needs Dev Note** label.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When the first beta of the upcoming WordPress release is shipped, go through the list of merged PRs included in the release and tagged with the **Needs Dev Note** label.
```

> - For each one of these PRs, write a Dev Note, coordinate with the WordPress release leads to publish the dev note.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For each one of these PRs, write a dev note, and coordinate with the WordPress release leads to publish the dev note.
```

Author: I think before `and` there shouldn't be a comma?

# Backward Compatibility

> Historically WordPress has been known for preserving backward compatibility across versions. Gutenberg follows this example wherever possible in its production public APIs. There are rare occasions where breaking backward compatibility is unavoidable and in those cases the breakage:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Historically, WordPress has been known for preserving backward compatibility across versions. Gutenberg follows this example wherever possible in its production public APIs. There are rare occasions where breaking backward compatibility is unavoidable and in those cases the breakage:
```

> * should be constrained as much as possible to a small surface area of the API.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Should be constrained as much as possible to a small surface area of the API.
```

> * should be documented as clearly as possible to third-party developers using dev notes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Should be documented as clearly as possible to third-party developers using Dev Notes.
```

> ## What qualifies as a production public API

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## What qualifies as a production public API?
```

Author: If we do that, we should do it for all the titles that are written as questions.

Reviewer 3: The "Hows" read more like statements.

Although technically, this can also be a statement, it reads more like a question, but it might be just me.

Reviewer 4: It's a content clause, it's perfectly fine as is.

The Gutenberg code base is composed of two different types of packages: 
 - **production packages**: these are packages that are shipped as WordPress scripts (example: wp-components, wp-editor...).

>  - **development packages**: these are made out of developer tools that can be used by third-party developers to lint, test, format and build their themes and plugins (example: @wordpress/scrips, @wordpress/env...). Typically, these are consumed as npm dependencies in third-party projects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - **development packages**: these are made up of developer tools that can be used by third-party developers to lint, test, format and build their themes and plugins (example: @wordpress/scrips, @wordpress/env...). Typically, these are consumed as npm dependencies in third-party projects.
```

> Backward compatibility guarantee only applies to the production packages as updates happen through WordPress upgrades.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Backward compatibility guarantees only apply to the production packages, as updates happen through WordPress upgrades.
```

 
Production packages use the `wp` global variable to provide APIs to third-party developers. These APIs can be JavaScript functions, variables and React components.

### How to preserve backward compatibility for a JavaScript function

* The name of the function should not change.
* The order of the arguments of the function should not change.
* The function's returned value type should not change.
* Changes to arguments (new arguments, modification of semantics) is possible if we guarantee that all previous calls are still possible.

### How to preserve backward compatibility for a React Component

* The name of the component should not change.

> * The props of the components should not be removed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The props of the component should not be removed.
```

> * Existing prop values should continue to be supported. If a component accepts a function as prop, we can update the component to accept a new type for the same prop, but it shouldn't break existing usage.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Existing prop values should continue to be supported. If a component accepts a function as a prop, we can update the component to accept a new type for the same prop, but it shouldn't break existing usage.
```

* Adding new props is allowed.
* React Context dependencies can only be added or removed if we ensure the previous context contract is not breaking.

### How to preserve backward compatibility for a Block

* Existing usage of the block should not break or be marked as invalid when the editor is loaded.
* The styling of the existing blocks should be guaranteed.

> * Markup changes should be limited to the minimum but If a block need to change its saved markup making previous versions invalid, a [**deprecated version**](/docs/designers-developers/developers/block-api/block-deprecation.md) for the block should be added.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Markup changes should be limited to the minimum possible, but if a block needs to change its saved markup, making previous versions invalid, a [**deprecated version**](/docs/designers-developers/developers/block-api/block-deprecation.md) of the block should be added.
```

## Class names and DOM updates

> Class names and DOM nodes used inside the tree of React components are not considered part of the public API and can be modified. 

Reviewer 5: I was just thinking today how unsustainable and regrettable I find the changes of #14420. I'd be happy to see those old classes removed.

Reviewer 6: Given that we have just started the development cycle for WordPress 5.4 it should be a good moment to clean this up. We would need to include it in dev notes, but given that it's a simple string replace action for theme authors, it should be straightforward to apply for them.

Author: I think it's possible to remove them today, especially as we refactor some of these components. We just need to make sure to write dev notes about these.

Reviewer 5: I'll make a note to put together a pull request. I think it will save much confusion for everyone, since the duplication of class names makes it very unclear which is the preferred, and how to name new classes. it seems reasonable enough to me that a DevNote should cover this.

Reviewer 5: Follow-up at #19050

> Class names and DOM nodes used inside the tree of React components are not considered part of the public API and can be modified. 

Reviewer 7: One fundamental concern I have here (and apologies for the late revisit) is that currently it is _only_ possible to build a block which renders child blocks horizontally by targeting class names, as the `InnerBlocks` component does not offer declarative UI configuration (e.g. `isHorizontal` or `shouldWrapBlocks`-style props).

I love the idea here but it feels like this is a case where it might be warranted to make an exception until a declarative alternative is available.

Author: That's a good point, I think the Navigation block has started building a declarative API for that, the columns block is also a horizontal container, it should be possible to offer a better API here.

Reviewer 5: I don't think this example contradicts the general recommendation though. If there's need for something like this, we shouldn't want that the developer feel need to target the classes, but instead offer it as an option via the component interface. It appears that's what's already being said in this comment chain, but I want to point out that I think it's consistent with treating the class names as unstable.

> Changes to these should be done with caution as it can affect the styling and behavior of third-party code (Even if they should not rely use these in first place). Keep the old ones if possible. If not, document these changes and write a dev note about the changes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Changes to these should be done with caution as it can affect the styling and behavior of third-party code (Even if they should not rely on these in the first place). Keep the old ones if possible. If not, document the changes and write a Dev Note.
```

Author: Can you lower case dev note :)

## Deprecations

> As the project evolves, flaws to existing APIs are discovered, or updates are required to support new features. When this happens, we try to guarantee that existing APIs don't break and build new alternative APIs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As the project evolves, flaws of existing APIs are discovered, or updates are required to support new features. When this happens, we try to guarantee that existing APIs don't break and build new alternative APIs.
```

> To encourage third-party developers to adopt the new APIs instead, we can use the [**deprecated**](/packages/deprecated/README.md) helper to show a message explaining the deprecation and proposing the alternative whenever the old API is used.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To encourage third-party developers to adopt the new APIs instead, we can use the [**deprecated**](/packages/deprecated/README.md) helper to show a message explaining the deprecation and propose the alternative whenever the old API is used.
```

## Dev Notes

> Dev notes are [posts published on the make/core site](https://make.wordpress.org/core/tag/dev-notes/) prior to WordPress releases to inform third-party developers about important changes to the developer APIs, these changes can include:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Dev Notes are [posts published on the make/core site](https://make.wordpress.org/core/tag/dev-notes/) prior to WordPress releases to inform third-party developers about important changes to the developer APIs, these changes can include:
```

Reviewer: I suggested the opposite earlier because elsewhere we use "dev notes" in text. Only in a title words are capitalised, at the start of a sentence, or in a label.

> * Promote new APIs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* New APIs.
```

> * Explain how some changes to existing APIs might affect existing plugins and themes (Example: classname changes...)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Changes to existing APIs that might affect existing plugins and themes. (Example: classname changes...)
```

> * When breaking backward compatibility is unavoidable, explain the reasons and the migration flow.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Unavoidable backward compatibility breakage, with reasoning and migration flows.
```

> * When important deprecations are introduced (even without breakage), explain why and how third-party developers can update their code base in consequence.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Important deprecations (even without breakage), with reasoning and migration flows.
```

### Dev Note Workflow

> * When working on a pull request and the need for a dev note is discovered, add the **Needs Dev Note** label to the PR.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* When working on a pull request and the need for a Dev Note is discovered, add the **Needs Dev Note** label to the PR.
```

> * If possible, add a comment to the PR explaining why the dev note is needed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* If possible, add a comment to the PR explaining why the Dev Note is needed.
```

Author: I'm going to discard the dev note suggestions per @ellatrix's suggestion it's probably not that important anyway.

Reviewer 3: Yeah, let's keep it lowercase.

https://www.grammarly.com/blog/capitalization-rules/

> * When the first beta of the upcoming WordPress release is shipped, go through the list of merged PRs included in the release and tagged with the **Needs Dev Note** label.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* When the first beta of the upcoming WordPress release is shipped, go through the list of merged PRs included in the release that are tagged with the **Needs Dev Note** label.
```

> * For each one of these PRs, write a dev note and coordinate with the WordPress release leads to publish the dev note.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* For each one of these PRs, write a Dev Note and coordinate with the WordPress release leads to publish it.
```

> * Once the dev note for a PR is published, remove the **Needs Dev Note** label from the PR.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Once the Dev Note for a PR is published, remove the **Needs Dev Note** label from the PR.
```
